I'm sorry, you're telling me about your birthday.
Yes, well, my birthday falls in August, and we come up here every August, and usually George gets here before I do.
Usually he can take a little bit more time off work, and so every year there's some interesting book waiting for me, usually from Titicombs, sometimes from some of the other used bookstores.
Isaiah Thomas is another one we like.
This one is from Titicombs.
I love all my places.
Yeah, actually, a few years ago, The Birthday Present was your book, and I read the first 200 pages of it in that house.
I remember writing in the back of it.
But this year, when I arrived, this one was waiting for me, which he got at Titicombs.
And I have a couple of other books by Stevenson, but I had heard about this one, but I had never seen it or read it.
And so it was very exciting to...
unwrap it and add this to the odd shelf.
It's a particularly important book in the history of the Arctic because his main thesis, as you can see from the title, it's about five and a half years he spent living off the land in the Arctic.
And he was really the first person who described the polar regions as not being a kind of terrible ordeal that you had to be a sort of macho hero in order to penetrate.
He felt that the Arctic was a friendly place with plenty of game.
You could travel during the winter.
You didn't have to hold yourself up all winter and then burst out for a few light months.
He felt that the Arctic was a place that you could simply live in for years, and he was the first non-Eskimo to do so.
So it's a very interesting attitude, all of his predecessors, of course.
talked about the Arctic as if it were an enemy.
And they were the macho hero who was about to conquer the enemy.
And he was the first one who... The ownership stamp of George E. Mann.
Yes.
Of course, the sad thing about buying used books like this is that one always wonders, how do they happen to pass out of the family?
And, you know, this is the first edition.
Of course, there may have been only one edition.
I'm not sure.
But it's just...
It seems sad.
The only thing that's the saving grace about this particular book, you know from reading my book, the one thing that makes me saddest is finding an old book that's in excessively good condition.
When I find one with uncut pages, it just breaks my heart to think that it has survived so long without anyone enjoying it.
The nice thing about this is that you can see this as a book that's been well loved and will continue to be.
My new book, the prologue, was basically with an uncut book that's been waiting for me for 84 years at the Athenaeum that I desperately needed while I'm finishing up Gentle Madness and I couldn't find it at Harvard and I couldn't find it at the BPL.
I had been working off some Xerox copies.
Bibliographical stuff, I had to get this and I wanted to get it in the bibliography.
So I go to the Athenaeum, and there it is, and it's a prestige, true story.
I'm checking them out, and not only are they uncut, but there's a card in the back, and it confirms that I'm the first person to ever take out these books.
So I say, I don't know if you've ever read it, the Athenaeum.
Oh, yeah.
Oh, it's fun.
What a beautiful, what a beautiful reading room.
So I say, 84 years.
Wow.
You wonder who they bought these books for?
And the guy looks up at me, I'm blinking, and he says, we bought them for you, Mr. Raspain.
Chris, what a wonderful answer.
That's true.
Well, I later found out they say that about once a week.
But each time they say it, it's true.
That's what a library is.
They're saving the books for the very people who want and need them.
Sometimes it's you, sometimes it's me, sometimes it's somebody else.
But that's the wonderful thing about a library.
But, you know, one of the issues I'm looking at, and you might even address yourself to this, is that you have libraries...
Today, not just public libraries, but institutional libraries, the computer will tell you now how often a book is checked out.
This book hasn't been used in five years at the University of Michigan.
It's a candidate to be deaccessioned.
Well, the whole question of deaccessioning, which of course was such a huge brouhaha in the San Francisco library.
A major chapter of a new book.
Oh, good.
I'll be interested to read it.
I think it's a crime.
And, of course, people like you and me are much more interested in the very books... Oh, no, just go ahead, and then we can also walk around if you want in the background.
I think that the reason it makes me so sad is that people like you and me are much more likely to want to check out a book that no one has read for 20 years, or maybe that no one has even cut the pages of in 84 years.
Those are the books that fascinate me.
Those are the books that I need to go to the library for instead of just borrowing them from a friend or going to the bookstore and buying a paper bag.
Those are the ones that I can't find anywhere else, which is why I love secondhand bookstores, because you can find books there that you can't find elsewhere.
For example, now I edit The American Scholar, and in my first essay from the column that I wrote for The Scholar, I talked about
I was talking about Bates and Russell and Wallace and, you know, Bates and Wallace and Darwin, some of the 19th century national historians, and talked about taking out a book of Wallace's from a major university library.
In fact, it was from the library at Stanford, and nobody had taken it out for, I don't know, I can't remember what the number of years was.
It's in the column.
But the sense of this incredible work
Now, what if they had decided that they were going to deaccession it?
And what if someone were studying 19th century natural history and exploration and didn't have the Meri archipelago to refer to?
Or even, I think it's not just a matter of deaccessioning, but what is available?
My second column for The Scholar I wrote on Charles Lamb, of course, is mentioned frequently in Ex Libris, and I decided I wanted to write a whole essay on him.
He's one of my great heroes.
When I went to my local Barnes & Noble to stock up, at first they said they had nothing by or about Lamb, not a single book, even though the superstores have, I think, over 300,000 titles.
Then it turned out they had in the children's section, they had one copy of Tales from Shakespeare by Charles and Mary Lamb, but they had no biographies of Lamb and no other books of Lamb.
I've never seen a good biography of Lamb.
There's actually a really good one called... Pardon me for interrupting, but... Yeah, there's a really good one, Young Charles Lamb, by, oh, what's her name?
Winifred, somebody rather.
It's mentioned, Winifred Courtenay.
And I think she probably had intended to write old Charles Lamb, but maybe she died first.
I don't know, she was old, pretty old when she wrote it.
It was probably about 15 years ago, and I don't think there was ever...
a second volume.
I think it's C-O-U-R-T-E-N-A-Y.
In any case, I have a pretty big Charles Lamb library, but it was all from second-hand bookstores.
I have about 10 books about Lamb that ranged in price from $250 to $795.
It's so sad when
Not only when you go into a place like The Strand or Titicombs or when I got essays of Eliot at Isaiah Thomas here in the Cape a few years ago, you go into a place like that and you ask if they have any lamb.
And do they have lamb?
They have a shelf of lamb.
And you go into Barnes & Noble and they don't have anything.
Because, of course, secondhand bookstores are full of the books that people don't want.
It's a wonderful way of gauging what's out.
Well, actually, there's a paradox here.
They're full of books that most people don't want, but the people like us are desperate to find, I think.
Yes, but of course, they only end up in the second-hand stores because somebody didn't want them.
And when you see at this strand, there's just a bulging shelf of lamb and at Barnes & Noble down the street, there's nothing except for tales from Shakespeare.
And I think that's why... I think it's related to the notion of deaccessioning that...
I don't put a lot of states in popular states, and therefore the fact that people have actually wanted something in the last five years seems to me a completely irrelevant fact.
It has absolutely nothing to do with whether the book should be either saved in a library or even stopped by Barnes & Noble, although in the latter case,
There are certainly hard-nosed marketing decisions that must be made.
I suppose one can't stop books that will be bought once every 20 years.
But I do believe that books go through phases, and I also believe that they— Now, we're talking about the actual object, not so much the book as the title of the book.
No, I think the titles also.
I think that Lamb, who knows, may have a great renaissance.
and then Barnes & Noble will sock him again.
But, gosh, what if the Athenaeum— well, the Athenaeum, I think, probably doesn't be accession in the same way.
What if other libraries looked in their computers and decided that LAMM was insufficiently checked out, as would very likely be the case, and got rid of its whole section of LAMM?
Then you couldn't go to the library, and you couldn't go to Barnes & Noble.
And what if you lived in a place that didn't have wonderful used bookstores?
You'd be really stuck.
My copy of Dibdin's Bibliomania was formerly the property of the Concord Public Library in Concord, you know?
A lot of my books were formerly the copy that belonged to public libraries or schools.
My Plutarch's Lives came from the Vineyard Haven.
A beautiful, beautiful set.
Apparently it had never been read.
It's a little brown edition, you know, 1890s.
Got it for 20 bucks.
If you get over to the vineyard, you should go to Booked In East, a little bit.
Cindy Meissner's store.
Really, it's easily as big as that barn there.
Which is full of, there's a lot of books in that barn.
She has first dibs of stuff on the vineyard.
They all come to him.
The books really do come to him.
It's really worth going into his store easily six times.
Because there's a lot of new stuff.
There's new stuff.
I don't know if you know him or not, but he's quite a character.
I like the story.
For us, it's a little expensive, but there's great selections.
Only lately it's been expensive.
I've got some of my very best things there.
He will take some books and put $200.
inexplicably on them.
I mean, these are five thousand books.
But then you will find, you know, I just found Simmons' history of the Renaissance in Italy, all five volumes, the whole edition, 1883.
In fact, it might even be, it might even have this stamp in it.
But now this one is from Titicombs, but it was originally sold at this one and then came down to Titicombs.
I must really have a hundred books from Titicombs
I think that's probably where everybody down here... He has a couple of choice houses on the Cape.
I see, and that's where people... I would say that's probably where it was bought new.
1921, you think?
That sans serif type would never be 1921.
I don't think... Yeah, but this book is a 1921 edition.
I just...
This looks like a typography.
Well, I'm going to check out the old corner books.
It hasn't been there in years.
But, of course, this could be something that had been bought there more recently.
Who knows the history?
See, that's why I love old books.
One can start imagining how many hands has this been through.
Was George E. Mann the only person who owned this?
I'm going to let you know.
I think that my history of the Renaissance in Italy might also have been owned by the same person.
Well, the wonderful thing also about these old houses is books.
I've been coming up with my husband to visit this house and this little one for about 15 years.
And the best thing about it was the books.
That is, there was still the original set of Beatrix Potter that he had read as a child and that now my children have read, a full set of Thornton Burgess.
Oh, yes, there were wonderful old editions and turn of the century sets of Dickens and Trollope.
In fact, when the house was sold to George's cousins, all the different members of the family came up and everybody got to pick one memento from the house to keep.
And, of course, many people were choosing things that actually were something, you know, big oil paintings and so on.
And George chose the set of Dickens simply because it was the one that he had grown up with and the child had remembered seeing on the shelves.
It meant more to him than any other set of Dickens possibly could.
And I remember him coming back that weekend.
I had wondered, you know, what is he going to bring?
What one thing in the house will come home to our place?
And so now we have that.
Did you meet George when you were at Harvard?
No, although we were there at the same time and had mutual friends, but he was two years behind me.
And so, although we took a lot of the same classes, he took them a year or two behind.
So we have many common memories that we didn't share simultaneously.
So I met him, actually, at Life magazine when I was a staff writer.
Would you say reading?
I mean, this is a silly question, having read the book, but did reading play a role in...
making you a couple?
Oh, a huge role.
I can't imagine marrying anyone who wasn't a reader.
But, of course, as soon as I walked into George's apartment and saw that there were books everywhere and that he had four-sealing bookcases, the place was a rather modest apartment, but it was clear that one of the reasons that everything he owned was modest was that he spent some money on books.
Of course, I immediately knew that there was a kindred spirit.
And we got to know each other.
I was a staff writer at Life also, and one of our other staff writers had left, so we needed a new one.
I asked her and heard of George and interviewed him, and it was definitely the best decision I ever made to hire him.
But a lot of our early conversations were also about each other's writing.
From the start, we've traded things back and forth that we've written,
And in fact, one of the first pieces I remember working on after George came to life was one of my Arctic pieces.
I guess I wrote two, I wrote three Arctic pieces, two early ones when I first knew George.
One was about polar bears, and one was about musk oxen.
In each case, life sent me up to the Arctic, and it were just fantastic experiences.
And I remember sitting with George and having him read those things, read them over.
We also had...
mutual interest in the literature of suicide, which sounds like an extremely gloomy romantic bond.
But I was working on a long piece for life about the right to die, and George was writing a book about suicide, which was published by Summit in 1991, called The Enigma of Suicide.
So we read all the same books, and
I spent many weekends editing his book on suicide.
I'm not sure he could have found any other girlfriend who is conversant and interested and sort of met all the same folks in the field of suicide.
But, of course, right from the start, it's been a tradition that we give each other books for birthdays, Christmases, and the...
He hasn't inscribed this one yet.
I'll make him do so.
And so this was a birthday present?
Yeah, I just got this.
So the birthday is when?
Oh, August 7th.
I turned 45, and this was the present.
Today's my daughter's birthday.
Oh, great.
I came up here the day after my birthday.
That's why I was asking.
Yeah, I got it on August 8th, but I had just turned 45.
And so he hasn't inscribed this one yet.
But, of course, looking at the inscriptions...
provides a kind of history of the relationship from the first one that I talked about in my book to a new friend.
I mean, talk about a diffident and noncommittal inscription that could be to just about anyone.
I like the idea of the common reader.
In fact, that Virginia Woolf quote is something that I had already flagged, I have to say, to use it.
And maybe you could just...
Talk a little bit about that.
And also in terms of the column, too.
Yes.
Virginia Woolf, of course, felt that she was a common reader.
And she certainly wasn't.
I think that was a piece of pure false modesty.
She took the phrase actually from Samuel Johnson's Life of Grey.
But the common reader as a phrase originally pioneered by Johnson and taken over by her...
described the non-scholarly, intelligent but ordinary Joe who simply likes books.
And she felt that that was what she was.
And when she wrote the essays for her common reader and then the second common reader, she, I think, with false self-deprecation, was saying, I am simply writing these essays about books
from the point of view of an ordinary reader who likes to read, not someone who brings any special academic qualifications, not someone who brings any particular brilliance to the act of reading, but simply someone whose life is furnished by books.
And when I read that, I thought, well, what an interesting statement.
If there was ever an uncommon reader, it's Virginia Woolf.
However,
There are many of us who really are common readers by just the definition that she made in her introduction to the first common reader.
We are people who don't bring anything special to our reading except our love of it.
It permeates our lives, and yet we have no special qualifications.
And it becomes a circle, because the more we read, the more we love reading, and therefore the better qualified we are for that position of common reader by Woolf's definition.
You know who else used that quote, precise quote?
I did an interview with Alfred Kays in just six months.
And he said, like Virginia Woolf, I am a common reader.
I have to show you.
Let me just bring you up.
By the way, do you want some coffee or ice water or anything like that?
We have water that we get from a snack.
Just to finish the common reader stuff, when I was starting to write my column for Civilization and thinking about what I wanted to call it and wanting to write a column about reading, I decided that for Virginia Woolford it was false modesty, but for me it was actually the truth.
Great quote.
You'll see that quote again.
And then, of course, the question came when I wanted to put these together into a book, and I always knew that they were going to be a book right from the start.
That's why all the essays have the same characters.
It's really a series of linked essays, sort of my life through reading, and I always wanted them to be in a particular order and so on.
Actually, you did write them in this order.
The last two I switched, just because I didn't want to end with Gladstone.
It seemed sort of too specialized.
I really envy you, though, the discovery of that book, by the way.
Oh, and can you believe the book?
I would have paid anything.
Fifteen bucks is all you could expect.
Oh, no!
I tell you, it is the most precious book in my library now.
Yeah, I got that one up at Riverrun.
But anyway...
Then the question came, well, should we call the book The Common Reader?
And I had a long conversation with Jonathan Delassi at FSG, and finally we both decided that people who had not read the original book
Wolf quotation, but just knew that she had called one of her books that, might think that I was somehow setting myself up as, in some way, Virginia Woolf's equal.
And so we decided that people, reviewers would make invidious comparisons between me and Virginia Woolf with very good reasons.
Actually, this is wonderful.
Well, I love Ex Libris, too, and also being able to find a book plate for the cover.
But speaking of Kazin and reading, I wish I could give you this.
Unfortunately, I just have one copy up here, and when we promised it to my husband's cousins who were taking this out after we're here, but this is my second issue.
You have to talk about that, too, okay?
Sure.
I just wanted to show you this, because we were talking about Kazin.
Kazin wrote the lead piece for my first issue, and I had a very...
which is one of his last pieces.
And then I had a very close epistolary relationship with him during his last year.
And so for this little tribute, I excerpted some excerpts from his letters that he had written to me during the last year of his life.
They're all about reading.
And they're three of the most beautiful paragraphs about reading.
I don't have to.
I'll copy these next week.
I'm going into Widener next week.
Oh, they'll have it.
Yeah, and they'll have the first issue, too.
I know where they have it.
It'll take a while.
Okay, they'll have my first one, too.
30 seconds to find it.
It also, you can find these in Barnes & Noble and stuff like that.
Actually, I've just subscribed.
Oh, great.
How wonderful.
I don't know where they got my name, but they sent...
Did I send a mailing?
Yeah.
Did you just get one?
Just got it.
Oh, this is the notorious mailing.
I just had a big brouhaha with my circulation director who, because she was in a rush,
sent that particular mailing to the printer without sending it to me.
She named her misspelled.
There are two comma flaws.
Oh, yes.
Phil Larkin is misspelled.
Phil Levine is misspelled.
There are two comma things.
Well, you know my thing about proofreading.
But I have to assume that you proofread this very well because there are a number in there.
Oh, yes.
We caught them.
I mean, I'm hoping.
No, that's the un-proofread galleys.
No, I think we caught them all.
I hope we did.
But anyway, you know, that mailing, I'm glad, I hope that the other people who get the mailing do exactly what you did, which is not read it very carefully, but just describe.
No, I knew I was interviewing you and I'd been following you.
Well, thanks.
Yeah, I think there's some stuff in it that you'll like.
Put a hard time around the book.
Nick Baker's on your board?
Yeah.
Yeah, a lot of bookie folks.
Well, I've interviewed Nick.
I'm interviewing you.
I've interviewed Greg.
Well, it's not bad.
Anyway, these letters that Kazan wrote to me in the last year of his life were basically about reading.
And let me just read you my favorite sentence.
And one of them he was talking about, I mean, he knew he was dying at this time of prostate cancer, and there had been a terrible rainstorm, and he'd gotten home, and he was miserable, and he writes...
Yesterday, sick at heart at the struggle with my 82-year-old body as I fought a violent cold rainstorm, I finally got home, picked up Hardy's poems, and read myself back to life, as it were, thanks to his gift for putting one back into the whole design of life and death.
No false optimism there, but what bracing truth in the very wilt of the words.
Now, reading this, particularly after his death, is moving for a variety of reasons, but one of the reasons it's most moving is
is because who else would pick up Hardy for cheer?
I mean, Hardy is the most pessimistic writer in history, and yet I think that Caden is the sort of man who would need to pick up someone whose work matched his own mood, yet whose words were beautiful, and if he needed to read himself back to life, that's exactly whom he would pick.
And, oh, I tell you, when I got that letter from him, there was,
Tears in my eyes.
I knew he wasn't going to last long.
I didn't know he was sick.
I interviewed him right when that last book came out.
You know, God, the American writer.
Yeah.
Great book.
Isn't it a great book?
Wonderful.
I am so cranky.
I told my wife, I said, this is why I've done a thousand interviews.
You say, are you ever prepared to do it?
Every interview I had ever done had prepared me.
I mean, I read the thing carefully, prepared the interview.
Oh, I'm sure you have.
Yeah.
He was picking up on every word, and really tough.
But he was sick, and he wasn't feeling good.
That's what it came down to.
I mean, there was one little line where we were talking about Evan Wilson.
It is interesting, I found that Wilson, when he was writing one of the Dency Scrolls,
I felt it necessary to go to the cave, and I said then, to explore the cave.
And he said, explore the cave?
He said he was too fat.
He said he couldn't explore anything.
I said, I withdraw the word.
I said, I didn't mean to say he explored the cave.
I said, he went to absorb the envy.
I said, he went on and on.
And I said, I never said, I never said, I never said he explored the cave.
Don't you dare say that in your piece.
I didn't mean it.
That's not what I meant, you know.
Well, he could be cranky, but he was also just wonderful.
And gosh, the incredible productivity of the last year of his life, where he wrote for us, he wrote for the New York Review of Books, he wrote for the New Republic.
He even published a poem.
Oh, beautiful stuff.
Oh, wonderful stuff.
Some of the best stuff he's done, I think.
And was writing letters like these, wonderful letters to me and all kinds of people.
In the Times obit, he died on his birthday, by the way.
Oh, I know.
As Shakespeare did, which is interesting.
Except Shakespeare didn't get to his 83rd birthday.
I remember my editor, Alan Peacock, called me and it happened to be on my 52nd birthday, which was in 95, and I was very upset.
And he said, what are you upset about?
He said, your book is coming out.
And I said, Alan, you know who died?
I said, here's my 52nd birthday.
You know who died on his 52nd birthday?
I said, Shakespeare.
He died in his 50s.
And I said, I'm still waiting for my first book to be published.
He said, well, I get it now.
It was what, 83?
83.
But we're talking about Wolf, Kazin also, people who are totally formed or shaped by the reading, I think.
I mean, Wilk was never formally educated, right?
Yes, I think some of the people who weren't formally educated, and of course Kazin was.
He was, but he will tell you his independent reading, I think.
Yes, oh, that's what did it.
The reading in 315 at the New York Public Library.
Oh, absolutely, that's what did it for him, which is why he was a very unconventional professor, because he hated academic interpretations of books.
He felt that both the right and the left had ruined the...
process of reading for love and consolation which he felt was the only way to have a relationship with the book he talks about in some of these letters here and he he felt that uh academic interpretations he hated theory he hated the application of politics uh to reading i mean he hated um he hated neoconservatives and post-modernists he wasn't pre or post anything he just wanted to read
And I loved that view.
And of course, I grew up in a household.
I mean, my father went to Columbia, but he never even finished his master's there.
And he had grown up in a household that had books, but mostly he found them on his own.
And his relationship with literature was one that he developed himself.
In fact, I remember him telling me that he
He used to go to the local library in Brooklyn and get out books, and he would read one on the way home and one on the way back to the library, because why waste that mile of walking without reading?
He said he got extremely good at reading while walking, stepping off the curb, still having the book in front of him.
Macaulay used to do that, too.
He used to read while he walked.
I think maybe those are the readers who love reading most, the people who didn't discover books through any formal avenues, but I guess through the same kinds of avenues that we fall in love with people.
I did an interview with Harold Bloom for this book, and I'm still getting his third hand.
So Bloom is quoting Philip Roth, who was quoted in the Times, and Roth, of course, is a great reader.
We all know that.
But it's saying Kazin is probably the greatest reader of American literature of the 20th century.
I would agree with that.
Yeah.
But going back, I found that very interesting.
Bloom was quoting Roth as saying he believes there are probably no more than—and this is an explanation for why his books aren't best-selling—but there may be only 50,000 serious readers, either in the United States or in the world, either way.
whatever the number is, do you agree with that basic premise?
I don't know what a serious reader is.
I don't even know if I'm a serious reader.
I think maybe I'd ruin my love of my books if I felt that I was too serious.
That's a great answer, yeah.
Continue with it.
Well, for example, Steve Smith, who was the founding editor of Civilization, now is the editor of U.S.
News and World Report, who's the one who encouraged me to write this Come and Read a column.
And he once said to me, you know, you should write
a book about polar exploration.
You know so much about it.
You love it so much.
It would be so much fun.
And I said, well, I'm not sure that I want to become an official expert.
I'm not sure that if that feeling of how knowing that you ought to do something ruins it for you.
There are so many children, for example, who love to read until they start being assigned reading as homework.
And I think that once you call yourself a serious reader, that sense of
dilettantish exploration, which is part of the fun, just vanishes for you.
I'd sort of like to leave my odd shelf something that is purely pleasurable that I'll never, you know, never make a profit out of.
I mean, I may live to eat my words.
There may be something that I'll get so interested in that I will decide I want to write a book about it, but serious readers.
I don't know.
You know, I looked at a demographic survey of the people who read The American Scholar, because I figured, gee, these must be serious readers, if anybody is.
And it was interesting.
They were readers.
But whether serious is the right adjective, I'm not sure.
Only about 15% of them were academics, for example.
And many of them were people like me.
There were a lot of journalists and writers.
There were also a lot of physicians.
lawyers, people who are in relatively specific professions that will not allow them a whole lot of really well-written reading during the course of their day, and who want to come home and read something that's well-written.
Are there serious readers?
I guess.
I think they're just interested readers with a fairly long attention span.
But I don't know how serious I wanted that.
Even in my first book, I felt that
One of the things that was a great advantage is that no one had ever put on that subject before.
So although people had written things on tiny little, I mean, there was plenty to read, but no one had taken a look at the whole forest before.
No one had even taken a look at an entire tree, maybe only individual leaves.
And so I never had any fear of having to compete with a serious book on the same subject.
It's a great feeling.
It's a wonderful feeling.
Now, when you wrote A Gentle Madness, of course, there had been much else written on book collecting, but no one else had all gotten it together in the same way.
Didn't you feel that, in a sense, you were doing the first?
Especially the living collectors.
Oh, yes.
That had not been done at all.
I mean, the French stuff, the history, you know, my debt is the previous published books, but going out and finding the living ones, and that's where it.
absolutely being a journalist comes in.
Yes.
And I'm proud to call myself a journalist.
Perhaps by definition, journalists aren't very serious.
But journalists have other good qualities.
They tend to be quick studies.
And storytellers.
They're storytellers.
They've done a lot of interviews.
So I think they know how to ask questions and how to listen.
And so for me, of course, having spent my whole career being the question asker, it's so much fun to be on the other end.
I thought,
Oh, gosh, when Nick Basbane is at home, he's writing down his questions.
He has to prepare.
I can go to the beach and get back at ten minutes to three.
I don't have to prepare at all for this.
It's lovely being on the other end.
But I'm delighted to be a journalist, and I think will always think of myself.
The fellow who reviewed my book for the New York Times described me as Mr. Basbane, a New England journalist.
This is the explanation for the phrase that follows.
has a taste for the eccentric.
I guess the translation of that is I like good stories.
I shouldn't take that as a rap.
I would love to be told that I had a taste for the eccentric.
In fact, I think my main problem is that I'm so uninterested in anything mainstream.
I'm only interested in the little eddies on the side.
I'm interested only in the eccentric, which is why I spent eight years writing a book about an epileptic, wrong child.
We should talk a little bit about that, by the way, if you don't mind.
Sure.
I hope you don't mind our jumping around.
Oh, no, no, that's the best way.
That's the best way.
I mean, you'll organize it when you write it, but I think that my favorite interviews are the ones that are sort of free-floating because they're...
more like a real conversation than your real conversation.
And if I don't really ask you questions about the book, I mean, it's because I've read it.
Oh, sure.
No, that's fine.
That's fine.
What would you like to know about Spirit Catch You?
Well, just doing that.
I mean, that was time for a departure, I guess.
Not a departure, but certainly a professional departure.
Well, any book would have been a departure for me because it was my first book.
I had written only articles up to that point.
So to do something that extended, of course, was going to be something new for me.
I really wrote it by accident, having no intention of spending that long.
I didn't realize it was eight years, by the way.
Eight years, yeah.
Well, I had two children in New Jersey during that time, so I had to make some money, so I did part of your freelancing.
And also wrote some of these essays.
Many of them were concurrent with the last few years of working on spirit.
But I wrote it for The New Yorker.
I wrote it for Bob Gottlieb.
And it was a long New Yorker piece originally that he had commissioned, and he accepted it.
But unfortunately, I turned it right before he left.
So he was very lucky that he paid for it, but Tina Brown didn't run it.
So then I was stuck with a 35,000-word thing that was too long for any other magazine, but too short for books.
So what should I do with it?
Boy, that's huge.
Yeah.
Those are the days of three-part series.
I wonder if the David Remnick will reinstate those again.
I hope so.
All right.
So it sat for about a year while I tried to get up the necessary energy to turn it into a book.
I knew it would just be a hell of a lot of work.
But I finally decided I couldn't let all that go to waste.
And so I wrote to FSG, my first choice publishing house, and I was very fortunate that Jonathan Galassi wanted it.
But when I started reporting it, of course, I had no idea it would be a book.
I just thought it would be an article.
And even the choice of subject, it was one of six ideas that I had
pitched about Gottlieb.
And I thought that there was another one of the six that I was sure he was going to pick, so I was just floored when he picked the one about the Hmong.
I thought, oh, no, I don't know anything about the Hmong.
I didn't even know how to pronounce the word.
I'm going to make a fool of myself.
But maybe that position of absolute ignorance helped me see the subject a little bit more freshly.
Ignorance is always helpful that way.
And so I was stuck with it for The New Yorker.
I was interested in the subject.
but I didn't know the first thing about it.
My proposal was full of errors.
I was just very fortunate.
Proposals don't mean anything.
I was very fortunate that Bob Gottlieb's ignorance was even more profound than my own.
I've looked at the proposals for my two books, and I'm so embarrassed.
I hope that they don't have a copy of it at the publisher.
I'm sure they've forgotten them.
There are errors in there.
Well, you know, sometimes I show it, too.
Sometimes when I give classes... Yeah, me too.
But sometimes when I give classes...
I'll show some of my proposals, including that one, to show these students that when they see the beautiful finished book, they somehow think that everything, our root, was to the same standard.
And it can be so intimidating that they might not take the first step.
And I want to show them that, like... Bring in a manuscript with all the little tags on it.
Sometimes I do that.
That's a book.
Right.
But like the...
like toddlers learning how to walk there's so many tumbles along the way and i want to show them that i made plenty of mistakes and you know it was just as idiotic as they secretly fear they are but i had a wonderful time doing that book i think because it was so i think so different from the the kinds of reading that i had to do for it were completely different from the sorts of things that i normally read for pleasure whereas of course all the stuff for ex libris is all the stuff that i read anyway i mean i have my shelf
books about books would exist whether or not I had written this column.
I think that spirit really took me out of myself and my own world in a tremendously useful way.
This sort of family that I grew up in and this sort of environment that I've always lived in is wonderful, but it can be a kind of claustrophobic hothouse because it's full of people exactly like me.
I think that one's first book should not be an exercise in looking in a mirror.
I always feel it's a mistake when people write a memoir as their first book with all these 30-year-olds, what do they have to remember?
Well, George is writing a memoir now about this house, but it's not his first book.
And it's about the house.
And it's about the house, yes.
Well, my second book, I consider Ex Libris to be kind of a memoir.
Well, it really is, because it is a story about your family.
It's a story about your marriage.
It's a story about your children.
And my life has been lived through books, and my life has been created by the books I read.
But it would have been a mistake if I had done it first.
I think first books should be a way to travel outside oneself, and I could never have found anybody more different from me than the Lee family.
who also taught me so many things about how to be a good parent and much else.
And the years that I spent among the Hmong, and also among the other culture in that book, it's really a book about two cultures, Hmong culture and medical culture.
And medical culture, after all, started to seem as exotic as Hmong culture.
But I think the time that I spent doing that book took me away from my own life
and my own perspective just took me far enough outside the things that i was used to and enabled me to look back from a different perspective in a way that was incredibly fresh freshening for me um so it gave me i think even though i probably won't write another book about them long it wasn't as if i spent my
I spent those eight years learning anything that was likely to be useful at a cocktail party.
It was a private body of knowledge that this was sort of my own little secret interest.
But it took me out of that excessively literary, excessively intellectual hothouse that I'd grown up in and that I'd been married into another one.
And then I think as I came to the last few years of that,
I was finishing up writing it.
The last few years, concurrently, was writing most of the essays in this book.
People think, gosh, how amazing.
How did she do another book in only a year?
It was actually that I was working on them concurrently.
Every eight weeks, it would be time to write another essay.
I used to take two weeks out of every eight.
Leah's story was so sad that being able to turn from that terrible tragedy to something that was funny and bright and
had a happy ending and where all the reading was stuff I'd already read and felt completely comfortable with.
I felt I was floundering around in such a foreign culture, both Hmong and medical culture.
At the beginning, I really didn't know enough medical vocabulary to be able to read Leah's chart accurately.
So there were these two foreign languages.
I sort of needed interpreters for both.
And with Ex Libris, I was so much on home territory.
The other thing worth mentioning, perhaps, I mean, not only was it a sort of pleasant juxtaposition of six months of tragedy and then two weeks of comedy, but I also had written very few essays before these, I think because the essay was my father's genre, and I think I had to pass 40 before I had the self-confidence
to venture into a genre that I was really made for, but that I didn't want to do earlier because I didn't want to compete with someone that I knew I couldn't surpass.
So I think I had... And competing in whose eyes?
Mine.
Certainly not his.
I think that I had stayed with reportage because it was less intimidating.
My mother was a reporter, but because she had done her major work before I was born,
I didn't actually see her working when I was growing up, so her work was not intimidating to me in the same way that his was.
I could actually see him write.
I would literally see him holding his pencil, and then I would read the resulting essay.
So I think I had to reach middle age before I could venture into what I felt was his territory and make it my own.
You're answering questions that I had intended to ask, so that's very good.
Thank you.
I also feel that you did something very nice for your mother there as well when you mentioned John Hersey.
Well, she's mentioned in a number of places.
Let me just ask, was that essay mindfully written to pay respects to your mother's tribute for unattributed work?
In a way, although I think that she doesn't particularly like to be written about.
But yes, I did want to.
I think her book, the one that she co-wrote with Teddy White, Thunder Out of China, is just a wonderful book.
And it's still in print, and anybody interested in China should read it, and most do.
My first book, which was a reportorial book about an Asian subject, was very much following in her footsteps, I would say, whereas the second one is more following in my father's footsteps.
And people who felt that
spirit came out of left field were probably people who knew only about my father and not about my mother.
If you read my mother's work, spirit made perfect sense.
But yes, I did want, I think, to give her her proper due when I wrote that piece about plagiarism.
And her work is mentioned in a few of the other... I think that people who are less familiar with her work and who somehow imagine
Me and my brother growing up in our father's household don't realize that, particularly in my case, the influence from my mother was at least as great.
Because my father is this sort of writer who sits in a library and thinks, whereas my mother was a reporter.
I say was.
She's still alive, but was because she hasn't been a reporter for quite a long time, whereas my father is still working.
But her work was always reportorial.
I started off as a reporter, and probably if I write another book, it'll be another book of reportage.
Essays also are a good thing to do when you have small children because you don't have to travel.
It's sort of exploring more inner travel than external travel.
But growing up with my mother, her tales of her...
the kind of journalistic writing that she did in her reportage, I think, fed as much into my conception of what a writer might be, and the kind of writer I've ended up being is very much an intersection of the two.
I wish I could say that I've carved out some entirely new territory that neither of my parents had established, but I can't say that I did.
I really feel that if you took what both of them did, put it in a wearing blender,
but I mixed it together that probably what would come out is the kind of work that I've ended up doing sure and I think that the work that she did was every bit as important perhaps more important for my first book I remember the you know that's funny I didn't connect that collaboration with Teddy White as being
you know, with your mother.
It's years ago.
But I do remember the Harrison Salisbury poem.
Now, there was another place where I really wanted to give her proper due.
Oh, I still get angry at writing about it.
I recall vaguely reading that and thinking, Jesus, this guy is really, what happened to the woman?
What happened to the woman?
Yes, what happened to the woman?
Well, it's just one of those.
Well, what was she, just the gopher?
I mean, did she just get the, and that's what I'm thinking, you know.
And I remember I interviewed Salisbury as well, and
He wrote that letter that you wrote, just like two letters that I read.
At least he totally acknowledged it.
He totally acknowledged it.
It was a very nice letter.
I remember he wrote me back very quickly and didn't make any excuses.
I thought about it and said, my God, she's right.
She's right.
But I think that my mother's omission from that introduction probably pained me more than a painter.
I think she was used to that sort of thing.
But I think growing up in a different generation, I was not used to it, and I found it extraordinarily annoying.
What do you make of the—and I think this might even allow us to get into a little bit of American scholars— what do you make of the modern library reading list?
And the Radcliffe list, if you want to?
Well, let me talk about the modern library list.
Of course, because it's just 20th century,
I'm less interested in it than if it were 19th century.
If somebody wrote in to the New York Times saying, gee, if it included the 19th century books, it'd beat all the 20th century books.
And I guess the 19th century is my century.
So I would feel even more interested in the list and be more interested in arguing with it than if it were 20th century.
I disagree with a lot of the books in the list, but I'm amused by it and glad that it was done.
not because I think it's possible to make this sort of ranking, but because I think it's gotten people talking about great books in a way that they hadn't before.
And also have people looking at the list and checking off how many they've read and thinking, gee, I've only read 20, maybe I should read more of these, and then I can actually talk about this at the next cocktail party.
I feel that it's both an absurdity and a delight.
I also think that the human...
instinct for ranking will never go away.
I went on a walk yesterday with my eight-year-old daughter, Susanna, whom you know about from Ex Libris.
And as you know, she's a great reader.
And she had just finished, she had read many of the Narnia books before this vacation, but finished reading the whole set, this vacation.
And she said, Mommy,
How would you rank the Narnia books from top to bottom?
What's your favorite, second favorite, third favorite, fourth favorite?
And we both, The Lion, the Witch, and the Wardrobe was both our favorite, and we both thought highly of The Last Battle and The Magician's Nephew.
But I liked The Silver Chair much better than she did, and she liked The Voyage of the Dawn Treader much better than I did.
And I felt it was like a mini modern library list.
At the age of eight, she was already thinking of literature as something rankable.
And I think that
It's absurd if you think of books, great books, as being like Olympic runners that can beat each other out by .01 of a second, but it's not absurd.
If you think about it as the way that Susanna was thinking about C.S.
Lewis, what she was saying was, I love these books so much
that they are like my friends, and just the way every eight-year-old girl will rank her friends in order.
This is my best friend, and my second best friend, and my third best friend.
It was a sort of degrees of love.
True.
And that she was interested in my degrees of love, and that it said something.
And then we talked about why did we both like The Lion, the Witch, and the Wardrobe best, and why didn't she like The Silver Chair as much, and why didn't I like The Voyage of the Dawn Treader as much.
And it was a fascinating discussion because it was a sort of discussion
They could only exist between two readers.
And I feel that the modern library list is a grown-up version of the same, and therefore... I think your library list is more valid, because it's one person responding to a bunch of books.
This is a more political thing.
This is where you have a board, and they're arbitrating.
I bet there are a lot of arguments, but you know, you have boards trying to decide who's going to win the National Book Award or the Pulitzer or whatever, and
I'm sure that they also have similar arguments, and I don't see why a book that was written 50 years ago can't be argued about in the same way.
Ridiculous as it was... It was fun.
It was fun because it was fun in the same way that, as you know, I write in my books and I turn down the pages and manhandle them.
I don't believe that books should be sacred, and I think that...
imagining this panel arguing and saying, no, Elysses can't be first.
Let's make it third.
Well, I'll trade you my number 17 for your number 39.
It's the link of Dobson.
I can't believe that's on the list.
But how about this one that you picked?
Okay, we can have the leak if we also have yours.
I mean, in some ways it's ridiculous, but it's also treating books like live, breathing things, which I believe they are.
And one of mine...
essays, as you remember, I talk about loving books platonically or carnally.
Both kinds of love are okay, but for me, it's carnal love.
I think there's something about not being too respectful, either to the physical book or to the metaphoric book, that is the content of the book.
I guess you could
say that maybe that book was being overly respectful by anointing these hundred as the greats and then everybody else was excluded from the club, but I don't think of it as being over-respectful, just the opposite.
And I like the notion of people, I mean, it's like children, you know, it's like tug-of-war, pushing and pulling, no, this one, no, this one, no, I want it.
That's great.
And the fact is, it was a white man's list, too.
It was a white man's list.
There was only one woman on the panel, and yes, all that stuff.
And an old white man's list.
An older, shall we say.
Yes.
Old, I think.
Which is all right, but it doesn't mean that these really are... It's reflective of the people who... Sure.
I think it's crazy to say that these actually are the hundred best books, but as a bonus contention or something that sparks even the kind of discussion that we're having now...
I think that it's great.
How do you feel about the whole canon?
To me, I think people are getting a little bit bored by the whole canon, literary canon debates.
Do you find that?
Well, maybe they're bored by it, but I think that it continues to be important.
And I think that a lot of things that have become boring still are important.
And I have some pretty strong feelings about the canon.
Now, you went to Harvard.
What was your major?
History and literature.
So you undoubtedly took a course in Shakespeare.
Oh, sure.
I did.
Actually, I did Shakespeare in a...
one-on-one tutorial for a whole year with Paul Cantor.
In your major at Harvard, you have what's called tutorials.
For sophomore year, you do a group tutorial, and then junior and senior year, it's individual tutorials.
It's a wonderful opportunity to work with a professor one-on-one.
So I did Shakespeare for a whole year with Paul Cantor, who is now a professor at UVA.
Well, I certainly...
feel that the removal of Georgetown by Georgetown and other universities of Shakespeare from their list of requirements for English majors is crazy.
Yes, the notion that you could graduate with a degree in English without having read Shakespeare, Chaucer, or Milton seems to me absolutely nuts.
The other reason that I believe in a canon and to some extent in a traditional canon is that I think it gives us a common frame of reference that people growing up
uh fifty years ago certainly a hundred years ago would be able to recognize certain quotations from shakespeare and the bible references to greek mythology certain touchstones of english and american poetry you could throw those quotations in in a sentence without having to attribute them um it gave people a sense of having a common ground we don't have that if we don't have an accepted canon on the other hand i think that freezing a canon is
just as bad as throwing out all the old chestnuts because the canon was assembled by white males and therefore consists mostly of white males.
And I think that anyone who's read my first book knows that I am, and certainly I would not call myself a multiculturalist, but I'm extremely interested in other cultures.
There's an important distinction in vocabulary between those two.
And I...
I am very interested in other cultures.
I'm interested in other points of view.
I'm interested in other literatures.
And I think that the ideal set of requirements for a literature major in college would include much of the old canon and then a fair amount of required dipping into the literature of other cultures.
I think to graduate from college as a literature major, having read only Shakespeare and Chaucer and Milton and Dickens, would be just as bad as not reading them at all.
So I think that cannons need fresh air or they will suffocate.
But I also think that if you throw a cannon out the window, not only do you lose the greatest literature that we have, but you lose that sense of commonality.
I went down and spent a couple of days at St.
John's College.
Oh, I know all about it.
Oh, yeah.
My father was really good friends with Springfellow Barr and a lot of the other people.
Oh, yes.
St.
John's is great.
My sister-in-law's father is a professor at St.
John's.
But basically, if you move to admit a new book, then you have to tell me which one comes out, which is, I think that's kind of what you're saying here to a degree.
Well, I would just maybe can a little bigger.
I mean, I think that, yes, there's some things that probably could come out, but I'm more interested in having simply people read more.
I would probably throw out
25% of the books in the canon and add another 50%.
I did it with Margaret Drabble, and she, of course, is the editor of the Oxford Companion.
So she does decide, determine in a way, what the canon is.
And so I said, well, tell me who's in and who's coming in and who's going on.
And she said, well, regardless of whether anybody reads The Fairy Queen, it stays in.
And there are some things that we know people don't read, but they stay in the canon.
And she was talking about, you know, it's the same thing that you're saying.
All right, fine.
I'm going to bring in more women, more 20th century writers.
But I really do, on the other hand, have to reduce on other ends.
I read The Fairy Queen as a sophomore at Harvard.
It was a requirement.
I read it in a tutorial with very good professors.
And I can't say that I learned much from it.
However, every play...
by Shakespeare that I read the next year.
And we read all of Shakespeare, all of Johnson, and all of Marlowe.
And every play of Shakespeare entered my life in an important way.
Most I'd already read.
And it was very useful to read them first in high school, and then again in college, and then see them again in productions as an adult, and read them now again for pleasure.
I think Shakespeare you have to come to many times over the course of a lifetime.
There's not one play that didn't have an effect.
Titus Andronicus included?
Well, I think it's not so much that Titus Andronicus is a great play, but it had an effect because it made you appreciate Shakespeare's other plays.
Each one, I think, needs to be read in relation to the others.
And, of course, what you don't get when you read a play in high school is the sense of how it connects to all of the other plays.
I should say just about reading.
When you were talking about my family, something entered my head, and it was that the... I'm checking off this question here, being a fad of it, so go ahead.
Okay, one of the things that just entered my head before you were talking about my parents is that, as you know from ex-libris, of course, I grew up in a house that was full of books, and yet I was not an early reader...
because my parents wouldn't let me see the words when they read aloud to me because they didn't want my brother and me to learn how to read before all of our friends.
They felt that when we reached first grade, they were worried that we were going to be labeled as brains, eggheads, and that socially things would be difficult for us and that also we'd be bored and therefore wouldn't like school.
if we already knew everything that was taught in the first grade.
So I remember my mother holding Dr. Sue so that we couldn't see the words, because she knew that if we could see them, we'd learn to read.
But you did learn to read, I think, despite this, didn't you?
Oh, no, in the first grade.
I didn't learn it until I was six.
I was taught how to read in school.
I was prevented from learning how to read in this incredibly literary household.
I was prevented from learning how to read.
Do you think that was a good strategy?
It's not one that we repeated with our children.
Susannah taught herself how to read when she was five.
She was in kindergarten.
She taught herself how to read.
We didn't teach her, but she taught herself.
We certainly didn't conceal the words from her.
There were a couple other kids in her class who already knew how to read when they got to the first grade, and it was fine.
But reading very definitely, even though the words physically were kept from you, reading was so apparent from the beginning.
Oh, yes, I was read aloud to for thousands of hours.
This is a way of life.
Oh, yes, thousands and thousands of hours, and it's how we raised Susanna and Henry, too.
Books are just completely a part of our lives.
and all the books up here that Susanna is now reading.
She's poking around and finding the same old children's books that George read when he was running here.
When you come on a holiday like this, do you bring a lot of books?
No, I don't bring any books because I don't have any free time.
That is, all my time on holiday is spent either with my children or in the evening after they're asleep with my husband or sleeping.
I did get some of your book read because when your book came out, we had only one child.